#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Play-by-Play/Lineups Notes and To-Do
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Construction of Lineups Notes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Scrape play-by-play data for seasons 1996 - 2014 (regular seasons) using
 playbyplay.py
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Create codebook (codebook.lyx) for eventmessagetype and eventmessageaction
 type variables in play-by-play data using 2004 - 2014 (sans 2011) data
 (merged data using pbpmerge.py)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Old:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Create and fill variables for the home and visitor team id, the segments/stints
 within a quarter, and the length in seconds of these segments/stints using
 teamid_seg.py.
 Because some segments don't start with eventmessagetype==12, use checkseg.py
 to check if segments start at 1 (see To-Do).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Create lineups using lineup.py
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
See above: Check length of lineup through first two steps of lineup.py (using
 only the p-b-p subs and other observations, but before looking at the box
 score) using lineuplencheck (and lineup4.py)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Use segftfix.py to check and change segment/stint number of free throws to
 segment that contains the corresponding foul (technical or personal) to
 credit appropriate lineup with these points.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
New -- re-writing code with functions, and fixing segments to account for
 elapsed time between subs without other entries in p-b-p:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Create and fill variables for the home and visitor team id, the segments/stints
 within a quarter, and the length in seconds of these segments/stints using
 pbp_idstint.py.
 Save data with suffix '_stint'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Check that the home and visitor team ids (from above) are not the same for
 each game using checkhomevissameid.py.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Three-step process of creating lineups using lusubspkl.py, lupbppkl.py and
 luboxpkl.py.
 All lineups saved as .pkl, with filename prefix lusubs, lupbp and lubox,
 respectively.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
In process of creating lineups, checked for various problems: After pbp
 step (step 2), files lupbp_badlen.py, lupbp_mult4.py and lupbplen4.py check
 if lineups within a quarter are of differing lengths or if lineup lengths
 are greater than 5, if there are games in which two or more quarters have
 lineup lengths of 4, and if lineups are of length 4 (or less), respectively.
 Similar to the length checks for stage 2, in stage three (using NBA box
 scores), files lubox_badlen.py and lubox_len4.py check for lineups of the
 wrong length (i.e., not of length=5).
 lubox_checkpt.py checks if playerXgame-level minutes from constructed lineups
 are equal to those from NBA box scores.
 As in to-do notes below, my minutes seem to be more accurate (relative
 to the play-by-play) than NBA box scores.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Create and fill variables for the home and visiting team scores, and fill
 the missing data in the existing 'SCORE' column, using pbp_addscore.py.
 Save data with suffix '_stsc'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Check if in-quarter scores go in reverse -- here, the pbp is in reverse
 -- using pbp_checkscore.py.
 Liste of bad games is saved in pbp_checkscore.txt
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Prior to checking and moving free throws to the appropriate stint/lineup
 (since some free throws are made after substitutions that occur after the
 corresponding foul), check for sequences of technical and shooting fouls
 where a corrsponding foul occurs after both a foul and sub but before the
 free throw associated with the original foul.
 This is done using pbp_checktechftsequence.py, pbp_checkshftsequence.py and
 pbp_checktechdelaysequence.py.
 After writing and running the script to move rfee throws to the appropriate
 stint/lineup, some of these free throws will have to be moved manually
 based on the lists created by these scripts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Free throws -- both technical and non-technical -- moved to 'correct' stint
 -- i.e., where the corresponding foul occured -- using pbp_stintftfix.py,
 with files saved with suffix '_stfix' (some may still need to be corrected).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
TeamXQuarter possessions, possession numbers, and points coded using pbp_teampos
s.py.
 Files saved with suffix '_perposs'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
pbp_checkofffoul.py checks if off foul isn't followed by turnover.
 This is a precursor to the scripts that will check if there are observations
 that imply changes in possession within the coded possessions that would
 affect the total team possessions in a quarter.
 This script is probably unnecessary, and will be replaced by a more comprehensi
ve possession change script.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Charlotte Hornets team rebounds and turnovers (and possibly other events)
 changed to correct team id for years 1996 - 2001 using pbp_fixcha9601.py
 (previously, in 'PLAYER1_ID, team code for New Orleans Hornets was used).
 Files saved with suffix '_fixcha'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Team possession re-done for years 1996-2001 with fixed Charlotte Hornets
 team id using pbp_teamposs_fixcha.py.
 Files saved with suffix '_perposs', as before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
CHecked if 'POSS_TEAM' matches either 'HOME_ID' or 'VIS_ID' using pbp_checkteami
d.py.
 Saved printed results as pbp_checkteamid.txt.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Manually checked each '_perposs' dataset for empty 'PLAYER1_TEAM_ID' columns
 for made and missed FG, FT, and TO ('EVENTMSGTYPE' in [1,2,3,5].
 The only cases of empty values have already been caught in pbp_checkteamid.txt
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Checkedrebounds and offensive foulsto see if neither the PLAYER1_ID nor
 PLAYER1_TEAM_ID' matches either the 'HOME_ID' or 'VIS_ID' using pbp_checkofffou
lrebteamid.py.
 Saved print of details with .txt file.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Added correct team ids where they were missing or incorrect from documented
 pbp_checkofffoulrebteamid.txt and pbp_checkteamid.txt.
 Re-saved files with '_perposs' suffix.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Checked if there are non-possessing team rebounds or offensive fouls, or
 non-terminal turnovers using pbp_checkposschange.py.
 Saved output with corresponding .txt file.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Checked sequences of technicals/delay of games and shooting fouls (if subs
 and other fouls occured before free throws were shot) using the three ...sequence.t
xt files.
 Checked change of possession using pbp_checkposschange.txt.
 Checked free throw fixes using pbp_checkftfix.txt.
 Made appropriate changes and saved data as ...ppfix.csv.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
To-Do
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Re-do segment code to account for substitutions that happen after game time
 has elapsed but with no other entries in the play-by-play.
 This necessitates running all stages of the code over again (yuck).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Check 1996-2003 and 2011 data for more eventmessageactiontype codes (to
 add to codebook)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Get 1996-2003 and 2011 data to same point as 2004 - 2014 (sans 2011) - 
\color green
Only 11 bad length teamXperiod lineups remain.
 All other lineups have exactly 5 players!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Edit teamid_seg so that the first segment is == 1 regardless of whether
 the quarter's first row has eventmessagetype==12 (as in current code).
 Fixes problem: some quarters don't start with eventmessagetype==12
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
In some games, play-by-play seems to be reversed (at least the score is).
 Check for which games the score is decreasing.
 - 
\color green
8 games have play-by-play/score reversed
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Check for sequences: Technical foul, sub, technical foul (incl.
 delay of game), technical free throw.
 Or shooting foul, sub, personal foul, other free throw (the latter shouldn't
 occur).
 The former should help credit technical free throws to the appropriate
 lineup -- there may be cases where the technical free throw is being credited
 to another technical foul after a substitution (unlikely).
 - 
\color green
All checks saved as pbp_check....txt.
 After moving free throws around via script, will have to manually make
 adjustments based on these .txt files (lists).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Check all games to see if constructed lineup minutes line up with box score
 minutes.
 - 
\color green
Difficult to check; NBA box scores are error-ridden.
 Saved check files
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Check if there are games for which the home and visitor team ids are the
 same.
 - 
\color green
All games have different home and vis team ids
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Segments may need to be re-done.
 Check if there are bunches of substitutions where some occur later than
 others.
 That is, there may be substitutions followed by playing time with no observatio
ns -- ie., dribbled around, out of bounds, without a turnover or shot or
 foul -- followed by another substitution.
 This would affect constructed playing time.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Per problem with uneven lineups (see below): check each quarter fror uneven
 length lineups
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Per above, check length of other lineups (first stint in each quarter) in
 same game and team as lineups of bad (<4 or >5) or uneven length.
 IF there are lineups of length 4 -- i.e., if not all are of length 5 -- using
 box score to get missing players won't work.
 Create document of these lengths to go together with the badlength document.
 - 
\color green
All games with bad length periods have 5 man lineups in all other periods!!!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Create list of teamXgame with multiple periods with 4 player lineups.
 Also create list of all 4 man lineups to check (note: do both using the
 lupbp files).
 - 
\color green
All 4 man lineups match up with old checks.
 There are only 2 games with multiple 4-man lineup periods -- which was
 the case with the old code (but now with all years checked).
 Since the regular final lineup code could accomodate these lineups in the
 old code, it should be easy to re-write it in function form.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
First cut: Move free throws to correct stint
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
First cut: Get team X quarter possessions and points.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
In years 1996-2001, for team rebounds and turnovers, 'PLAYER1_ID' and/or
 'PLAYER1_TEAM_ID' is (sometimes) miscoded for the Charlotte Hornets.
 Here, the value these columns take is in line iwth the team id of the New
 Orleans Hornets.
 This is due to the team moving at the start of the 2002-03 season.
 As a result, when finding the team possessions, a problem occurs, where
 this additional team id is sometimes coded (or a blank value) as the team
 id.
 To remedy: First step: Using data with suffix '_stfix' for years 1996-2001,
 change 'PLAYER1_ID' and 'PLAYER1_TEAM_ID' to 1610612766 (Charlotte Hornets)
 if equal to 1610612740 (New Orleans Hornets) using pbp_fixcha9601.py.
 Save files with suffix '_fixcha'.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Second step for fixing Hornets team ids (see above): Re-run pbp_teamposs.py
 for fixed 1996-2001 files, save with suffix 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

perposs', as before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Check if possession team matches either home or visitor team id.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Change/add team id where wrong or missing (from rebounds or offensive fouls).
 These errors are documented in pbp_checkofffoulrebteamid.txt (from pbp_checkofff
oulrebteamid.py).
 Also, add missing team ids (where the team id does not much the home or
 vis team id).
 These errors are documented in pbp_checkteamid.txt (from pbp_checkteamid.py).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Before getting stint/lineup possessions and points: First step: check if
 team X quarter possessions are correct.
 That is, check if there are implied changes of possession within calculated
 possessions.
 Perhaps also check end of quarter possessions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize

\color red
Before getting stint/ineup possessions and points: Second step: check if
 moved free throws have been moved to correct stint.
 If not, correct corrected free throws (i.e., move them to the actual correct
 stint) manually.
 Use pbp_..sequence.txt files, and also check STINT_DIFF (abs>1), INDEX_DIFF
 (abs>6) and Q_DIFF (!=0) variables.
 Also correct the implied additional possessions from above.
 Document all checks and changes.
 - 
\color green
1996 data is particularly buggy (1997 also not the greatest, but probably
 good enough); it shoul dprobably be dropped..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Go back and check technical free throws from pbp_checktechsequence.txt and
 corresponding data (ppfix suffix).
 Free throws should go to the lineup on-court when series of techs started.
 It appears as though when players are ejected for tecs, the substitution
 is recorded immediately after the technical foul.
 The free throws associated with technical fouls after the ejection and
 sub should still count against the lineup on-court when the techs began.
 Change this if there are rrors (and save as ppfix).
 Note: Only need to check 2005-2014 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Perhaps also create new variable to move technical free throws for at start
 of quarter for techs that occured at end of previous quarter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Check for possessions that are >24 seconds & contain neither rebounds nor
 fouls (possibly not perfect).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Get stint/lineup possessions and points.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Check each segment for players in the play-by-play who don't show up in
 the lineup.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Consider, Adjusted +/- presumably assigns an average effect of a player.
 It assumes that these effects aren't correlated with the identity of the
 other players on that player's team.
 As such, once these stats are calculated, you can plot a histogram (by
 minutes) of the effect a player has on his lineups.
 Here, since each player has a linear effect, you look only at the expected
 +/- (the difference in the average of individual +/- for each team) v.
 the actual +/-.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Problems with Data
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In 4th quarter of game 1009 in 2001 data, both teams have uneven lineup
 lengths.
 There are players who sub off who were already on the previous off-list.
 There may be a substitution missing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
See above: In 3rd quarter of game 159 in 1997 season, a player subs off
 in consecutive substitutions/segments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Including the two uneven lengthed periods above, there are only 11 periods
 among the 19 regular season lineups that have lineups of uneven length
 or of length greater than 5.
 Not bad.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In 2008 data, around index 153190, it's very unclear where possessions change.
 This index number is included in the pbp_checkposschange.txt file.
 Possessions unchanged from original algorithm for now.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
